% This is file NWSguide.tex
% release v1.00, 12th June 2012
%   (based on JFPguide.tex v1.11 for LaTeX 2.09)
% Copyright (C) 2012 Cambridge University Press

\NeedsTeXFormat{LaTeX2e}
\newcommand{\specialcell}[2][c]{\begin{oldtabular}[#1]{@{}l@{}}#2\end{oldtabular}}


\documentclass{nws}

%%% Macros for the guide only %%%
\providecommand\AMSLaTeX{AMS\,\LaTeX}
\newcommand\eg{\emph{e.g.}\ }
\newcommand\etc{\emph{etc.}}
\newcommand\bcmdtab{\noindent\bgroup\tabcolsep=0pt%
  \begin{tabular}{@{}p{10pc}@{}p{20pc}@{}}}
\newcommand\ecmdtab{\end{tabular}\egroup}
\newcommand\rch[1]{$\longrightarrow\rlap{$#1$}$\hspace{1em}}
\newcommand\lra{\ensuremath{\qquad\longrightarrow\qquad}}

\title[Bridging or Bonding? Measures of Topic Centrality for Online Political Engagement]
      {Bridging or Bonding? Measures of Topic Centrality for Online Political Engagement}

 \author[C.J.K Raymond]
        {Cameron Raymond\\
        School of Computing, Queen's University, Kingston K7L 3N6, CA\\
         \email{c.raymond@queensu.ca}}

\jdate{May 2020}
\pubyear{2020}
\pagerange{\pageref{firstpage}--\pageref{lastpage}}
% \doi{S0956796801004857}

% \newtheorem{lemma}{Lemma}[section]

\begin{document}

\label{firstpage}

\maketitle

\begin{abstract}
  The advent of social media has enabled political elite to engage with the
  broader populous in new and unforeseen ways -- and the ability to bypass the
  traditional mediating forces of mass media allows for a more direct promotion
  of policy, ideology and party stances. This has prompted questions as to how
  different types of messages modulate the overall political discourse, and if
  certain categories of messages carry bridging or bonding characteristics.
  Drawing on Twitter data leading up to the 2019 Canadian Federal Election, the
  notion of engagement graphs are introduced and two novel, graph-based metrics
  of topic centrality  -- one which measures how central a topic was to the
  general discourse, and one which measures how central a topic was to a
  particular voting bloc -- are developed. Statistically significant variations
  in topic centrality are then shown, demonstrating the existence of bridging
  and bonding messages. Their implications for political polarization are then
  discussed.
  \paragraph{Keywords:} \emph{centrality, political communication, social media, topic modeling}
\end{abstract}

\tableofcontents

\section{Introduction}

The way information is distributed and received has changed significantly over
the past decade. As Cogburn and Espinoza-Vasquez argue, Barrack Obama’s 2008
presidential campaign was a watershed moment in social media campaigning – and
in the subsequent decade, from Macron to Brexit to the Five Star Movement,
social media has played an increasing role in how politics is conducted
\cite{manucci2018wind,cogburn2011networked}.  The same holds true for Canada,
between 2013 and 2018 the share of Canadian federal media expenditure spent on
digital advertising rose from 27\% to 65\%, a 140\% increase, making the study
of new media critical from a social science perspective
\cite{annualReportCanadaAdvertisingActivities_2018}. Over the past 12 years,
political elites have subverted traditional models of political communication by
using social media to directly promote various policies, topics and issues to
the electorate\footnote{The terms policy, issue and topic will be used
interchangeably to refer to categories of
messages.}\cite{mcnair2017introduction}.

Additionally, it is important to note that not all messages promoted by
political elites are likely to serve the same purpose. As Schipper and Woo note
— dog whistles, micro-targeting, and persuasion games are often a part of
electoral politics \cite{schipper2018political}. Some topics may be logistical
in nature, informing party affiliates of campaign events; other topics may be
promoted in an attempt to rally that party's core voting bloc; others, finally,
may be an attempt to attract engagement from new, untapped demographics
\cite{shah2007campaign}. The latter two categories are in many ways analogous to
Robert Putnam's conception of social capital, which Putnam describes as the idea
that ``social networks have value.'' \cite{putnam2000bowling}. Here, Putnam
draws the distinction between two forms of social capital: the bonding type,
which occurs within a group -- and the bridging type, which spans different
demographics \cite{putnam2000bowling}. Hofer and Aubert note that usage of
Twitter had some affect on perceived amounts of bridging social capital
\cite{hofer2013perceived}. As well, Miller et al. and Gil et al.'s findings
suggest positive correlates between social media usage and political activity
\cite{miller2015talking,gil2012social}. However, no research has touched on how
different types of messaging affect the bridging or bonding capabilities of
social media, and how this relates to political media. Therefore, the research
question being proposed is: are their data to support the notion that some
political messages are bonding in nature, rallying members within a group, while
other political messages are bridging in nature? This question will be answered
within the context of the 2019 Canadian Federal Election with the tweets of
Canada’s five major, English speaking party leaders: Andrew Scheer, Elizabeth
May, Jagmeet Singh, Justin Trudeau, and Maxime Bernier.


In order to answer this question, a justification of Canadian politics and
social media data in this context will be given. Then an overview of the data
collected and a formal definition of the political engagement graph used will
allow for the exploration of two measures of topic centrality: total network
topic centrality, and party leader topic centrality. Finally, results from this
process and a discussion of their implications will highlight possibilities for
future research.  

\subsection{Social Media in the Canadian Context}

While it is clear that technology is changing how information is received, and
thus also changing how politics is conducted, it may not be clear the role of
Canadian politics in this context. However, Canada’s political system is a
fertile environment to test the importance of political messaging, because
relative to most liberal democracies, it is dominated by party
politicians \cite{cross2004contours}. As Carty put it: 

\begin{quote}
  No obvious simple geographic reality, no common linguistic or religious
  homogeneity, no common revolutionary experience or unique historical moment
  animated [Canada] or gave it life. Canada was created when a coalition of party
  politicians deemed it to be in their interest to do so, and it has been
  continuously grown, reshaped and defended by its politicians.\cite{carty2010political}
\end{quote}

Thus, it is not surprising that Canada’s political system
encourages electoral pragmatism – and developed large, ``big tent'' parties that
are among the most organizationally weak and decentralized of established
democracies \cite{cross2004contours}. This system defines political parties as brokers of the often
conflicting, weakly integrated electorate –- as opposed to mobilizers of
distinct communities, articulating claims rooted in their pre-existing
interests. In this way, parties act as the ``principal instruments of national
accommodation, rather than democratic division'' \cite{carty2010political}.

The dominance of parties in Canadian politics, their amorphous ideological
stances, and the many intersectional geographic, linguistic and religious
cleavages have given birth to what’s been coined the brokerage party system
\cite{carty2010political}. The need to capture pluralities in a diverse range of
electoral districts means that most parties have to take stances on most issues,
and thus when a user engages with a specific issue, it doesn’t necessarily
invoke a specific party or vice versa \cite{franklin1992decline}. This makes Canada a preferable case
relative to systems with smaller, single-issue parties. The relative lack of
ideological constraints mean Canadian politicians are forced to decide when to
expand their voter base, risking fragmentation, and when to appeal to their
existing supporters, potentially segmenting off parts of the electorate
\cite{schipper2018political,franklin1992decline}. 

\subsection{Content as a ``First-Class Citizen''}

Given the utility of Canadian politics in answering questions about different
axes of political engagement, the question then is: how do we observe and
interrogate this landscape? Social media data, culled from platforms like
Twitter, are inherently relational -- and thus lend themselves well to being
represented as graphs. An empirical analysis that observes and measures how
users behave and engage with political elite online privileges this relational
aspect of social media. Social network analysis helps avoid the pitfalls of
survey data, famously described by Allen Barton as “a sociological meat grinder,
tearing the individual from [their] social context”
\cite{freeman2004development}. While there exists studies on user engagement in
social networks, online or otherwise, such research generally focuses on
connections between individuals (\emph{User A} is connected to \emph{User B})
and rarely acknowledges the context with which engagement occurs
\cite{Zhang2017FindingCU,kavanaugh2002community,hofer2013perceived,miller2015talking}.
In an online environment, certain users may engage with certain content
producers when they produce certain forms of content, but choose not to engage
with that same producer if the subject matter differs. As such, more nuanced
graph models are needed and developed that acknowledge the importance of the
producer of the content \emph{as well as the content itself} in shaping
engagement. Content holds an especially important role in online mediums, where
users have a granular ability to control what they expose themselves to. This
theoretical underpinning allows for a more nuanced analysis and in doing so
makes content a ``first-class citizen.''


\section{Methods}

\subsection{Data}

% Twitter data - %'s and stuff + ReTweet/Tweet graphs
The novel dataset used was collected via Twitter's historical search application
programming interface (API), which allows user's to programmatically access any
publicly available tweet. The API was used to collect all of the
English\footnote{Denoted by a language marker in the historical search API.}
tweets from Canada's five, English speaking party leaders: Andrew Scheer,
Elizabeth May, Jagmeet Singh, Justin Trudeau, and Maxime Bernier. The timeframe
of collection ranges from October 21, 2018 to October 21, 2019 -- the eve of
Canada’s federal election. While the tweets from each Federal party’s official
Twitter accounts were also collected, they predominantly acted as logistical
tools – informing party affiliates of events and rallies. The personal accounts
for party leaders were generally more pertinent to their beliefs, platforms and
style of rhetoric, and thus are better suited to analyze the bridging versus
bonding nature of various topics. In this spirit, only tweets of the party
leader were used, excluding retweets. Figure \ref{fig:tweets_over_time}
visualizes the daily and cumulative number of tweets over time, in aggregate and
by party leader, resulting in 7,978 total tweets. Additionally, for each tweet collected from a party leader, all of the available
retweets by general users\footnote{The term general users will denote those
active on Twitter who are not party leaders.} were collected for a total of
113,293 retweets by 36,450 general users. This is, again, visualized in
aggregate and by party leader in Figure \ref{fig:retweets_over_time}.

\begin{figure}[h!]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.8\textwidth]{figures/tweets_over_time}
  \caption[Daily and Cumulative Tweets over Time]{Daily and Cumulative Tweets over Time}
  \label{fig:tweets_over_time}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[h!]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.8\textwidth]{figures/retweets_over_time}
  \caption[Daily and Cumulative Retweets over Time]{Daily and Cumulative Retweets over Time}
  \label{fig:retweets_over_time}
\end{figure}

Given the inherent noise and extraneous info in text data, it is
standard and necessary to preprocess text before modeling
\cite{sapul2017trending}. The text cleaning pipeline removes punctuation marks,
stop words, words with fewer than three characters, and URLs, as well as common
Twitter symbols like ``RT:'', ``@'' and ``\#''. Emojis were converted to text
using the Python package \texttt{emoji}. After this process, all text was
converted to lower-case and lemmatized to get rid of common suffixes. Therefore,
the tweet in Figure \ref{fig:tweet_ex} after preprocessing reads: \emph{wherever
maple leaf fly represents rich history bright future value hold dear happy flag
day canada}.

\begin{figure}[h!]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.8\textwidth]{figures/tweet_ex}
  \caption[Daily and Cumulative Retweets over Time]{Daily and Cumulative Retweets over Time}
  \label{fig:tweet_ex}
\end{figure}

\subsubsection{Engagement Graph}

The networks considered in this paper are connected, unweighted, and undirected.
Let $(V,E)$ be a network, where $V$ is the set of vertices and $E$ is the set of
edges. If vertex $v_1$ is connected to vertex $v_2$, it is denoted by
$(v_1,v_2)\in E$. Engagement graph's are defined with additional constraints
that denote three categories of vertices: those that \emph{produce objects}
(tweets, songs, goods, services, \etc), those that represent the objects
produced, and a third set of vertices that represent those who choose to
engage with the various produced objects in the network. In this context the
engagement graph represents the tweets that party leaders produce, and the
general users who choose which tweets to engage with. An example of this type of
political engagement graph is shown in Figure \ref{fig:ex_engagement_graph}.
More formally, the political engagement graph is defined below:

\begin{itemize}
  \item \emph{Vertices}: Let $V_{1}=\{v_{1},v_{2},\dots\}$ be the set of
  party leaders; $V_{2}=\{v_{1},v_{2},\dots\}$ be the set of tweets by the
  party leaders; and let
  $V_{3}=\{v_{1},v_{2},\dots\}$ be the set of ``general users'' who
  retweet tweets. Let the total set of vertices $V=V_{1}\cup V_{2}\cup V_{3}$.
  
  \item \emph{Edges}: Let $E$ be the set of edges. Allow the edge $(v_{1},
  v_{2})\in E$ if and only if $v_{1}\in V_{1}, v_{2}\in V_{2}$ or $v_{1}\in
  V_{3}, v_{2}\in V_{2}$. By this definition, we will only allow edges from a
  party leader vertex to a tweet vertex, or from a general user vertex to a
  tweet vertex.
\end{itemize}

\begin{figure}[h!]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[scale=0.2]{figures/ex_engagement_graph}
  \caption[Example Engagement Graph]{Example Engagement Graph}
  \label{fig:ex_engagement_graph}
\end{figure}

Further nuances can be added to distinguish between different types of objects,
which in this context would refer to tweets of different topics. Figure
\ref{fig:engagement_graph_no_topics}  visualizes the full political engagement
graph collected with all 5 party leaders, 7,978 tweets, 36,450 general users,
and 113,293 retweets\footnote{The number of retweets is equivalent to the number
of edges from tweet vertices to general user vertices.} built with these constraints.

\begin{figure}[h!]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.75\textwidth]{figures/engagement_graph_no_topics}
  \caption[Full Engagement Graph]{Full Engagement Graph}
  \label{fig:engagement_graph_no_topics}
\end{figure}

\subsection{Topic Modeling}

In order to evaluate the bridging and bonding characteristics of various
political messages on Twitter, the tweets collected must first be organized by
topic. Given the size of the data, manually coding each label is inefficient as
well as subject to individual biases. As a result, there is a need for
techniques that autonomously organize big, unclassified corpuses of text. 

Topic modeling methods find clusters of words that frequently occur together
(topics), connects words with similar meanings, and distinguishes different uses
of words with multiple meanings \cite{alghamdi2015survey}. This is based on the
underlying assumption that a document is concerned with a fixed set of topics,
and that the frequency of words used is indicative of this latent structure
\cite{blei2003latent}. Given that topic extraction approaches based on keywords
are brittle, context specific and are unable to capture emergent topics --
unsupervised machine learning techniques, like the latent Dirichlet allocation
(LDA) developed by Blei et al., are especially useful for autonomous topic
extraction. An LDA model defines two distributions -- one which models topics as
``a distribution over a fixed vocabulary of terms,'' and another which models
documents as a distribution of topics based on the occurrences of words in each
document, the topic distribution per word and the importance of words to each
topic \cite{blei2003latent}. The LDA requires four inputs: the text corpus --
which in this context are the cleaned tweets from all 5 party leaders; $\alpha$
-- which acts as a concentration parameter for how documents are modeled as
topics; $\beta$ -- which acts as a concentration parameter for how topics are
modeled as words; and $k$ -- which is the number of topics to be modeled
\cite{blei2003latent}.

\begin{figure}[h!]
  \centering
  \begin{tabular}{cc}
    \includegraphics[width=0.40\textwidth]{Figures/Coherence_Surface_k=4} &
    \includegraphics[width=0.40\textwidth]{Figures/Coherence_Surface_k=5} \\
  (a) $k=4$ & (b) $k=5$ \\[6pt]
    \includegraphics[width=0.40\textwidth]{Figures/Coherence_Surface_k=6} &
    \includegraphics[width=0.40\textwidth]{Figures/Coherence_Surface_k=7} \\
  (c) $k=6$ & (d) $k=7$ \\[6pt]
  \end{tabular}
  \caption[LDA Parameter Sweep Results]{LDA Parameter Sweep Results}
  \label{fig:lda_param_sweep}
\end{figure}

By performing a parameter sweep, where $\alpha$ and $\beta$ lie on the interval
$[0, 1]$ with increments of 0.05, and $k$ ranging from 4 and 7, various LDAs
were exposed to the entire corpus of tweets and then evaluated using $c\_v$
coherence. Figure \ref{fig:lda_param_sweep} shows, for each $k$ value, the
$c\_v$ coherence as a function of different combinations of $\alpha$ and
$\beta$. The most performant model had a $k$ value of 7, $\alpha$ of 0.31 and
$\beta$ of 0.81 and a $c\_v$ coherence score of 0.48. By labelling each tweet as
the maximum probability value in its topic mixture, each tweet was assigned a
single topic. The word clouds for each topic are described in Figure
\ref{fig:topic_word_clouds}.

\begin{figure}[h!]
    \centering
    \begin{tabular}{cccc}
    \includegraphics[width=0.25\textwidth]{Figures/topic_1_wordcloud} &
    \includegraphics[width=0.25\textwidth]{Figures/topic_2_wordcloud} &
    \includegraphics[width=0.25\textwidth]{Figures/topic_3_wordcloud} &
    \includegraphics[width=0.25\textwidth]{Figures/topic_4_wordcloud} \\
    (a) Topic 1 & (b) Topic 2 & (c) Topic 3 & (d) Topic 4 \\[6pt]
    \includegraphics[width=0.25\textwidth]{Figures/topic_5_wordcloud} &
    \includegraphics[width=0.25\textwidth]{Figures/topic_6_wordcloud} &
    \includegraphics[width=0.25\textwidth]{Figures/topic_7_wordcloud} \\
    (e) Topic 5 & (f) Topic 6 & (g) Topic 7 \\[6pt]
    \end{tabular}
    \caption[LDA Topic Word Clouds]{LDA Topic Word Clouds}
    \label{fig:topic_word_clouds}
\end{figure}

Topic 1 pertained to campaign messages, rallies and logistics – and makes up
8.2\% of all tweets. Topic 2 contains tweets regarding a carbon tax, pipelines
and the economy – and makes up 16.3\% of all tweets. Topic 3 contains tweets
about the SNC Lavalin affair, a scandal that plagued Justin Trudeau, and tweets
about corruption – making up 18\% of all tweets. Topic 4 is predominantly
appeals to the middle-class and economy – and is 29.7\% of all tweets. Topic 5
contains celebratory messages about the campaign, as well as tweets regarding
national holidays and days of remembrance – and make up 15\% of all tweets.
Topic 6 is made up of tweets about immigration, diversity and free speech – and
makes up 11.5\% of all tweets. Finally, topic 7 contains tweets regarding
healthcare, abortion and pharmacare – and makes up 1\% of all tweets. The
magnitude of how many tweets were assigned to each topic is shown in Figure
\ref{fig:topic_distribution}.

\begin{figure}[h!]
  \centering
  \begin{tabular}{cc}
    \includegraphics[width=0.40\textwidth]{Figures/topic_distribution} &
    \includegraphics[width=0.60\textwidth]{Figures/grouped_bar_by_pl_topic} \\
  (a) Topic Breakdown & (b) Number of Tweets per Topic by Party Leader \\[6pt]
  \end{tabular}
  \caption[LDA Topic Distribution]{LDA Topic Distribution}
  \label{fig:topic_distribution}
\end{figure}

As can be seen by part (b) of Figure \ref{fig:topic_distribution} -- while Topic
6, tweets pertaining to diversity and immigration, only made up 11.5\% of all
Tweets they made up the majority of Maxime Bernier's. This signals an attempt on
his part to bring these topics to the forefront of the debate despite few other
party leader's broaching the topic. Additionally, Andrew Scheer and Elizabeth
May's campaigns relied heavily on topic 3, the SNC Lavalin affair, with a
disproportionate number of tweets aimed at Justin Trudeau's handling of the
scandal. Finally, it can be noted that Maxime Bernier and Andrew Scheer also had
a disproportionate number of tweets pertaining to topic 2 -- rebutting Justin
Trudeau's plan to implement a carbon tax, and arguing for greater access to
Alberta's Oil Sands. In Schipper and Woo's model for political messaging, an
initial assumption is that each party leader tailors their messages to appeal
to various demographics; however, that remains to be seen without a more
rigorous analysis of how the electorate engage with each category of message
\cite{schipper2018political}. By assigning each tweet vertex to a topic and then
coloring the tweet vertices accordingly, the full engagement graph (Figure
\ref{fig:engagement_graph}) for online political content is complete and ready
for analysis. 

\begin{figure}[h!]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.75\textwidth]{figures/engagement_graph}
  \caption[Full Engagement Graph]{Full Engagement Graph With Tweet Vertices Colored By Topic}
  \label{fig:engagement_graph}
\end{figure}

\subsection{Topic Centrality}

Descriptive measures like Figure \ref{fig:topic_distribution} show the frequency
with which tweets of different topics were promoted by Canadian party leaders
leading up to a major election. However, these Figures say little about how
different policies rallied groups of existing supporters, or bridged different
voting blocs. In order to answer such questions – the metric eigenvector
centrality is expanded upon. The result are two variations of topic centrality:
total network topic centrality and party leader topic centrality. By juxtaposing
the two, various insights about how different topics influenced discourse can be
derived.

\subsubsection{Eigenvector Centrality}

Research concerning the centrality of vertices in a graph have successfully been
applied to problems in marketing, economics and epidemiology; Stephenson and
Zelen explored the utility of centrality measures in studying the social
dynamics of Gelada baboons \cite{stephenson1989rethinking}. Common centrality
measures include measures of degree and betweenness. This article will focus on
the notion that central vertices are close to other central vertices, which is
one of the founding intuitions behind Google’s “page-rank” algorithm and
eigenvector centrality.

As Newman lays out in his 2016, Mathematics of Networks: ``the eigenvector
centrality [\dots] accords each vertex a centrality that depends both on the
number and the quality of its connections: having a large number of connections
still counts for something, but a vertex with a smaller number of high-quality
contacts may outrank one with a larger number of mediocre contacts.''
\cite{newman2008mathematics} The eigencentrality of vertex $i$ given an
adjacency matrix $A$ is defined as $x_i$ where $x_i$ is proportional to the
average eigenvector centrality of $i$’s neighbors:

\begin{equation}
  x_i=\frac{1}{\lambda}\sum_{j=1}^{n}A_{ij}x_j
\end{equation}

where $\lambda$ is some constant. By defining the vector of centralities as
$\vec{x} = (x_1,x_2,\dots)$ this equation can be rewritten as $\lambda \vec{x} =
A \cdot \vec{x}$, and it is evident that $\vec{x}$ is an eigenvector of the
adjacency matrix with eigenvalue $\lambda$ \cite{newman2008mathematics}. By
Perron-Frobenius theorem, picking the largest eigenvalue of $A$ will result in
all elements of $\vec{x}$ being non-negative \cite{newman2008mathematics}.

\subsubsection{Total Network Topic Centrality}

\begin{figure}[h!]
  \centering
  \begin{tabular}{cc}
    \includegraphics[width=0.40\textwidth]{Figures/engagement_graph} &
    \includegraphics[width=0.40\textwidth]{Figures/jagmeet_singh_subgraph} \\
  (a) Full Engagement Graph & (b) Political Engagement Subgraph for Jagmeet Singh\\[6pt]
  \end{tabular}
  \caption[Example Engagement Graph and Subgraph]{Example Engagement Graph and Subgraph}
  \label{fig:engagement_and_subgraph}
\end{figure}

Total network topic centrality is an aggregate of the eigenvector centrality of
all tweets of a certain topic in the entire engagement graph. For reference,
this graph has been reproduced in part (a) of Figure \ref{fig:engagement_and_subgraph}. More formally,
and with slight abuse of notation, the total network topic centrality of topic
$t$, $T_{t}$, can be defined as the set of all eigenvector centrality measures for tweet
vertices of topic $t$ in a graph $G$. 

\begin{equation}
  T_{t} := \{ x_i , \forall i \in G \mid type(i)=tweet, topic(i)=t \}
\end{equation}

When taking the aggregate (sum, mean, z-score relative to other topics), a
single number can be assigned to the relative importance of topic $t$. And in
keeping with the strengths of eigenvector centrality, $T_{t}$ will be larger if:
those tweets are retweeted a lot, and if they're retweeted by \emph{highly
engaged} users. This is a desirable aspect as highly engaged users are more
likely to share content, attend a political rally and vote
\cite{miller2015talking}. Therefore, total network topic centrality provides a
nuanced metric for how central different issues were to the entire online
discourse. 

\subsubsection{Party Leader Topic Centrality}

In order to measure how central a topic is to a party leader's base, party
leader topic centrality was developed. This assumes a world in which party
leader $j$ is the only actor with which general users can engage with. This is
done by taking a subgraph of $G$ -- $G_{j}$ -- which only contains party leader
$j$, all of $j$'s tweets, $I$, and all edges from $i\in I$ to the general users
who retweeted one of $j$'s tweets. An example of this is in part (b) of Figure
\ref{fig:engagement_and_subgraph}, which demonstrates the subgraph for Jagmeet
Singh. 

After the subgraph $G_j$ is constructed, the party leader topic
centrality $P_{tj}$ is defined as the set of all eigenvector centrality measures
for tweet vertices of topic $t$ in a graph $G_{j}$.

\begin{equation}
    P_{tj} := \{ x_i ,  \forall i \in G_{j} \mid type(i)=tweet, topic(i)=t \}
\end{equation}

Similarly, by taking the aggregate of $P_{tj}$ a single centrality score can be
assigned that measures how important topic $t$ was to those who engaged with
that party leader. This will be higher if it: has a high number of retweets
and is retweeted by $j$'s \emph{most engaged followers}. Highly active users who
rarely engage with that specific party leader are therefore discounted in this
metric relative to someone who is less engaged, but concentrates their attention
on that party leader's content. 

\section{Results}

After calculating $\textbf{T}=\{T_{t}, \forall t \in topics\}$\footnote{$topics$
refers to the seven topics that tweets could be assigned to.} and
$\textbf{P}=\{P_{tj}, \forall t \in topics,\forall j \in
party\_leaders\}$\footnote{$party\_leaders$ refers to the five Canadian Federal
party leaders whose tweets were collected.}, each individual centrality measure,
$T_{t} \in \textbf{T}$ and $P_{tj}\in \textbf{P}$, can be summated
($\hat{T_{t}}$/$\hat{P_{tj}}$), have it's mean calculated
($\overline{T}_{t}$/$\overline{P}_{tj}$), or have it's z-score taken relative to
other topics in its set\footnote{For the party leader topic centrality, the
z-score of topic centrality is based off of other tweet topics for that party
leader.} ($\stackrel{z}{T}_{t}$/$\stackrel{z}{P}_{tj}$).

Figure \ref{fig:topic_centrality} shows plots of $\textbf{T}$ as a function of
$\textbf{P}$; each point is colored according to its party leader and is
annotated with the topic that it pertains to. The x-axis is the party leader
topic centrality score for all party leader and topic combinations -- and the
y-axis is the total network topic centrality score for each topic\footnote{This
explains why all party leader topic centrality scores for the same topic lie on
the same point on the y-axis.}.

\begin{figure}
    \centering
    \begin{tabular}{cc}
    \includegraphics[width=0.40\textwidth]{Figures/sum_opposing_centrality_chart_(expanded)} &
    \includegraphics[width=0.40\textwidth]{Figures/mean_opposing_centrality_chart_(expanded)} \\
    (a)  \textbf{$\hat{T}$} by \textbf{$\hat{P}$} & (b) \textbf{$\overline{T}$} by \textbf{$\overline{P}$} \\[6pt]
    \multicolumn{2}{c}{\includegraphics[width=0.40\textwidth]{Figures/zscore_opposing_centrality_chart_(expanded)}}\\
    \multicolumn{2}{c}{(c) \textbf{$\stackrel{z}{T}$} by \textbf{$\stackrel{z}{P}$}}
    \end{tabular}
    \caption[$\textbf{T}$ aggregates in relation to $\textbf{P}$]{$\textbf{T}$ aggregates in relation to $\textbf{P}$}
    \label{fig:topic_centrality}
\end{figure}

Some initial insights from comparing \textbf{$\hat{T}$} by \textbf{$\hat{P}$}
with \textbf{$\overline{T}$} by \textbf{$\overline{P}$}; while Maxime Bernier
promoted a large number of tweets regarding immigration, free speech and
diversity as indicated by a high $\hat{P}_{6M}$ -- these tweets gained little
traction overall in the entire network ($\stackrel{z}{T_{6}}$) as well as
compared to other topics Bernier tweeted about ($\stackrel{z}{P}_{6M}$).
Additionally, despite the relatively few tweets pertaining to health care and
pharmacare (topic 7), and the low total network centrality score
($\stackrel{z}{T_{7}}$), they were disproportionately important to Justin
Trudeau's network ($\stackrel{z}{P}_{7T}$). Discrepancies in a topic that gives
the highest $\hat{P_{tj}}$ for a party leader (total topic engagement) and
$\overline{P}_{tj}$  (mean topic engagement) can illustrate inefficiencies in
connecting with their target demographic.

As well, for each topic -- the party leader topic centrality score can be
averaged across all the different party leaders to give a more general analysis
of how central topics were to the entire network, or to any individual party
leader. This is shown in Figure \ref{fig:topic_centrality_combined}. Here it is
most insightful to look at \textbf{$\stackrel{z}{T}$} by
\textbf{$\stackrel{z}{P}$}, specifically in the lower right-hand quadrant and
upper left-hand quadrant. The former indicates tweet topics that are more
important to a party leader's base than to the entire network (topics 7, 4 and
1). Topic 1 -- campaign dynamics -- intuitively makes sense in this category; it
is not surprising that messages about the campaign, where rallies are, \etc
would  be most important to a party leader's base. Conversely, tweets in the
upper left-hand quadrant indicates tweet topics that are more important to the
overall network than to the individual network -- which may be an indication of
those topics spanning partisan divides (topics 2 and 3).

\begin{figure}
    \centering
    \begin{tabular}{cc}
    \includegraphics[width=0.40\textwidth]{Figures/sum_opposing_centrality_chart_(mean_of_leaders)} &
    \includegraphics[width=0.40\textwidth]{Figures/mean_opposing_centrality_chart_(mean_of_leaders)} \\
    (a)  \textbf{$\hat{T}$} by \textbf{$\hat{P}$} & (b) \textbf{$\overline{T}$} by \textbf{$\overline{P}$} \\[6pt]
    \multicolumn{2}{c}{\includegraphics[width=0.40\textwidth]{Figures/zscore_opposing_centrality_chart_(mean_of_leaders)}}\\
    \multicolumn{2}{c}{(c) \textbf{$\stackrel{z}{T}$} by \textbf{$\stackrel{z}{P}$}}
    \end{tabular}
    \caption[$\textbf{T}$ aggregates in relation to $\textbf{P}$ (party leader average)]{$\textbf{T}$ aggregates in relation to $\textbf{P}$ (party leader average)}
    \label{fig:topic_centrality_combined}
\end{figure}

\begin{table}
  \caption{Topic Centrality Measure Results}
  \label{fig:tab_topic_cent_results}
  \begin{minipage}{\textwidth}
    \begin{tabular}{lccccccccc} \hline\hline
      \multicolumn{1}{c}{}  & \multicolumn{3}{c}{\specialcell{Total Network\\Topic Centrality}} & \multicolumn{3}{c}{\specialcell{Andrew Scheer}} & \multicolumn{3}{c}{\specialcell{Elizabeth May}} \\ 
      \hline
      Topic                   {\quad}& \textbf{$\hat{T}$} {\quad}& \textbf{$\overline{T}$} {\quad}& \textbf{$\stackrel{z}{T}$} {\quad}& \textbf{$\hat{P}$} {\quad}& \textbf{$\overline{P}$} {\quad}& \textbf{$\stackrel{z}{P}$}& \textbf{$\hat{P}$} {\quad}& \textbf{$\overline{P}$} {\quad}& \textbf{$\stackrel{z}{P}$}\\
      \hline
      1 {\quad}& 0.779  {\quad}& 0.001 {\quad}& -0.486    {\quad}& 0.726     {\quad}& \textbf{0.015}\footnote{Bold figures represent the largest value for that metric.} {\quad}& \textbf{0.438}     {\quad}& \textbf{6.566} {\quad}& \textbf{0.019} {\quad}& 0.216     \\  
      \hline
      2 {\quad}& 9.034   {\quad}& \textbf{0.007} {\quad}& 0.395     {\quad}& 8.947     {\quad}& 0.014 {\quad}& -0.024    {\quad}& 1.074 {\quad}& 0.017 {\quad}& -0.110    \\  
      \hline
      3 {\quad}& \textbf{10.263}  {\quad}& \textbf{0.007} {\quad}& \textbf{0.402}     {\quad}& \textbf{10.176}    {\quad}& 0.014 {\quad}& -0.148    {\quad}& 7.097 {\quad}& 0.018 {\quad}& -0.090    \\ 
      \hline
      4 {\quad}& 8.719   {\quad}& 0.004 {\quad}& -0.106    {\quad}& 8.500     {\quad}& \textbf{0.015} {\quad}& 0.269     {\quad}& 5.156 {\quad}& 0.018 {\quad}& -0.043    \\ 
      \hline
      5 {\quad}& 5.507   {\quad}& 0.005 {\quad}& 0.033     {\quad}& 5.425     {\quad}& 0.014 {\quad}& -0.088    {\quad}& 4.278 {\quad}& 0.018 {\quad}& -0.061    \\  
      \hline
      6 {\quad}& 0.519   {\quad}& 0.001 {\quad}& -0.580    {\quad}& 0.380     {\quad}& 0.013 {\quad}& -0.703    {\quad}& 1.490 {\quad}& 0.018 {\quad}& -0.082    \\ 
      \hline
      7 {\quad}& 0.153   {\quad}& 0.002 {\quad}& -0.387    {\quad}& 0.145     {\quad}& \textbf{0.015} {\quad}& 0.107     {\quad}& 0.438 {\quad}& \textbf{0.019} {\quad}& \textbf{0.218}     \\ 
      \hline
      \hline
      \multicolumn{1}{c}{}  & \multicolumn{3}{c}{\specialcell{Jagmeet Singh}} &\multicolumn{3}{c}{\specialcell{Justin Trudeau}} &\multicolumn{3}{c}{\specialcell{Maxime Bernier}} \\\hline
      Topic                   {\quad}& \textbf{$\hat{P}$} {\quad}& \textbf{$\overline{P}$} {\quad}& \textbf{$\stackrel{z}{P}$}& \textbf{$\hat{P}$} {\quad}& \textbf{$\overline{P}$} {\quad}& \textbf{$\stackrel{z}{P}$}& \textbf{$\hat{P}$} {\quad}& \textbf{$\overline{P}$} {\quad}& \textbf{$\stackrel{z}{P}$}\\
      \hline
      1 {\quad}& 0.567   {\quad}& 0.022 {\quad}& -0.466    {\quad}& 0.816     {\quad}& 0.018 {\quad}& 0.341   {\quad}& 3.353     {\quad}& \textbf{0.018} {\quad}& \textbf{0.386}   \\
      \hline
      2 {\quad}& 3.081 {\quad}& 0.023   {\quad}& -0.223    {\quad}& 2.714     {\quad}& 0.018 {\quad}& 0.140   {\quad}& 5.441     {\quad}& 0.017 {\quad}& -0.117  \\
      \hline
      3 {\quad}& 2.219 {\quad}& 0.022   {\quad}& -0.395    {\quad}& 0.515     {\quad}& 0.017 {\quad}& 0.036   {\quad}& 3.493     {\quad}& 0.017 {\quad}& -0.071  \\
      \hline
      4 {\quad}& \textbf{8.813} {\quad}& 0.025   {\quad}& 0.184     {\quad}& \textbf{17.505}    {\quad}& 0.017 {\quad}& 0.067   {\quad}& 2.458     {\quad}& 0.017 {\quad}& 0.158   \\
      \hline
      5 {\quad}& 3.846 {\quad}& \textbf{0.026} {\quad}& \textbf{0.306}     {\quad}& 5.889     {\quad}& 0.016 {\quad}& -0.312    {\quad}& 1.015     {\quad}& \textbf{0.018} {\quad}& 0.237   \\
      \hline
      6 {\quad}& 0.460 {\quad}& 0.021 {\quad}& -0.619    {\quad}& 0.558     {\quad}& 0.017 {\quad}& -0.052    {\quad}& \textbf{12.835}    {\quad}& 0.016 {\quad}& -0.073  \\
      \hline
      7 {\quad}& 0.419 {\quad}& 0.021 {\quad}& -0.611    {\quad}& 0.316     {\quad}& \textbf{0.019} {\quad}& \textbf{0.484}     {\quad}& 0.224     {\quad}& 0.017 {\quad}& -0.033  \\
      \hline
      \end{tabular}
    \vspace{-2\baselineskip}
  \end{minipage}
\end{table}

The full results for the topic centrality measures are in Figure
\ref{fig:tab_topic_cent_results}. To ensure that the variation in the topic
centrality means isn't the result of random variability, the Kruskal-Wallis test
was performed on each set of topic centrality scores. In this context, a
non-parametric test like the Kruskal-Wallis test is desirable compared to an
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) as the eigenvector centrality scores for a topic
were generally not normally distributed. The total network topic centrality had
statistically significant variations across different topics at the
$\alpha=0.0001$ level. Andrew Scheer ($p=3.23*e^{-15}$), Elizabeth May
($p=0.0007$), Jagmeet Singh ($p=2.07*e^{-12}$), Justin Trudeau
($p=5.93*e^{-10}$), and Maxime Bernier's ($p=4.76*e^{-6}$) party leader topic
centrality scores showed significant variations at the $\alpha=0.001$ level.
What this demonstrates is that the content of the tweet produced has a clear
impact on the levels of engagement observed, and that this holds true for
individual party leader's bases as well as the general discourse as a whole. The
box plots that demonstrate the variability in topic centrality scores, for both
the total network topic centrality metric and for each party leader's party
leader topic centrality, are visualized in Figure
\ref{fig:topic_cent_box_plots}.

\begin{figure}[h!]
  \centering
  \begin{tabular}{ccc}
  \includegraphics[width=0.33\textwidth]{Figures/total_network_box_plot} &
  \includegraphics[width=0.33\textwidth]{Figures/AS_box_plot} &
  \includegraphics[width=0.33\textwidth]{Figures/EM_box_plot} \\
  (a) Total Network Topic Centrality & (b) Andrew Scheer & (c) Elizabeth May \\[6pt]
  \includegraphics[width=0.33\textwidth]{Figures/JS_box_plot} &
  \includegraphics[width=0.33\textwidth]{Figures/JT_box_plot} &
  \includegraphics[width=0.33\textwidth]{Figures/MB_box_plot} \\
  (e) Jagmeet Singh & (f) Justin Trudeau & (g) Maxime Bernier \\[6pt]
  \end{tabular}
  \caption[Topic Centrality Box Plots]{Topic Centrality Box Plots}
  \label{fig:topic_cent_box_plots}
\end{figure}

\section{Discussion}

%! WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED
%   * Both the party leader and the content affect engagement
%   * That certain types of messages were important to the overall network, and
%       certain types were important to the party leader. These don't
%       necessarily overlap
%! WHY DOES IT MATTER
%   * This brings us back to our analogy of social capital. In an era of
%       heightened political polarization it's helpful to know that things like
%       the healthcare, while important, did not really span partisan divides.
%   * Also important to note that while spanning a topic that spans divides
%       could be a result of multi-partisan communication, it could also be a sign
%       of debates occurring along party lines. But this is still helpful to know
%       for people who study political polarization
    
The methods and statistics developed in this study are new and warrant further
refinement and interest -- as even their preliminary uses have uncovered novel
insights that may be overlooked with existing measures and models of political
communication. They demonstrate statistically significant results that both the
producer of the content \emph{and the content itself}, are crucial in
understanding how social media modulates political discourse and engagement. At
a more granular level, it allows for the investigation, and confirmation, that
certain messages are more important to the overall network, and certain messages
are more important to individual party leaders' bases. The key insight is that
these two categories do not necessarily overlap.  The topics that informed
individuals of party events and campaign information, as well as appeals to
individuals economic worries (topics 1 and 4 respectively) tended to drive
engagement amongst a party leader's supporters, but had less influence on the
overall discourse. Conversely, issues that were pervasive in the public
discourse, like the SNC Lavalin affair and discussion of a carbon tax,
translated into the digital realm as well -- and tended to be more important to
the overall discourse. While all party leaders touched on these big ``dinner
table'' topics, and presumably had differing stances on them, they were not the
sole preserve of any one party and thus engagement was more likely to cross
party lines. 

Returning back to the loose analogy between bridging and bonding social capital,
and bridging and bonding messages; in an era that is characterized by a
heightened sense of political polarization, it is useful to know how different
types of messaging provoke different forms of political engagement
\cite{schipper2018political}. It is interesting to note that engagement
surrounding policy issues like healthcare, while important, were often confined
to the bubble of a political leader. Bonding social capital reinforces
identities, and mobilizes solidarity -- from a theoretical standpoint, it stands
to reason that bonding messages may serve similar purposes
\cite{putnam2000bowling}. Bridging messages, like bridging social capital, bring
along weak ties, and diffuse information to a larger network of individuals
\cite{putnam2000bowling,gil2012social}. These are the topics with a higher total
network topic centrality score. However, while Putnam argues that "bridging
social capital can generate broader identities and reciprocity, where as bonding
social capital bolsters our narrower selves," it remains to be seen if the same
holds for bridging and bonding messages \cite{putnam2000bowling}. It is very
well possible that individuals engage with these bridging issues along partisan
lines, in which case a higher total network topic centrality would be more
indicative of online arenas where partisans meet and clash. Further research is
needed to illustrate and understand when and if bridging issues have the ability
to calm partisan divides or flame them. 

\section{Conclusion}

This study has theoretical and empirical contributions. First, the concept of
engagement graphs were introduced. This allowed for a more full analysis of the
online landscape, acknowledging that only looking at connections between users
does not reflect the full relationship between producers of content and their
consumers. Engagement graphs were then used in a political media context to
develop two metrics of topic centrality, one which measures how central a topic
was to the general discourse, and one which measures how central a topic was to
a particular voting bloc. These theoretical developments were applied to
Canada's 2019 federal election, which introduced a new data set of 7,978 tweets
and 113,293 retweets across 36,450 general users. After the set of tweets was
modeled and classified via unsupervised topic modeling techniques, metrics
of topic centrality were then applied and analyzed. In doing so, discrepancies
in engagement were found, showing that often party leaders ignored topics that
drove higher levels of engagement amongst their base. Not only this, but often
topics that were important to the overall discourse were less important to the
party leader's base and vice versa. Variations in topic centrality were shown to
be statistically significant and their limitations were discussed, suggesting
future research opportunities. These metrics provide a new tool for analyzing
what drives political engagement, how information diffuses across a network, and
with more work demonstrates potential to analyze how messaging affects political
polarization.

\paragraph{Acknowledgments:} Special thank you to Dr. Robin Dawes, Dr. Adrienne
Davidson, Dr. Jonathan Rose and Miranda Dell'Anna for their help, guidance and
support in this study. 

\paragraph{Funding:} This research received no specific grant from any funding
agency, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

\paragraph{Conflicts of Interest:} None.

\pagebreak

\bibliographystyle{nws}
\bibliography{bibliography}

\label{lastpage}

\end{document}

% end of NWSegui.tex